[Music]
hello
i'm tom seyfried professor of biology at
boston college
in chestnut hill massachusetts i'll be
presenting information today
describing cancer as a metabolic disease
and then discuss the implications that
this information has
for the development of novel cancer
therapies
i'd like to start my presentations with
an overview of the current cancer crisis
so that we can get a full appreciation
of
the challenges that we have so this this
this chart data from the american cancer
society
shows the number of new cases deaths per
year and deaths per day from 2013 to
to estimated information from 2020.
so as you can see there is a significant
increase in the number of new cases over
the years
and there was about a 4.3 percent
increase in the number of deaths from
cancer in the united states per year
and over 1600 people a day dying from
cancer
each each day during these during these
periods
this the this is rather depressing
and concerning information in stating
that we have made
little if any major progress in reducing
cancer deaths over this period so one
has to ask the question
you know what is largely responsible for
the failure
to manage to prevent or manage
cancer and in my mind
it has to do with the view of
how we understand cancer is cancer a
nuclear genetic disease
or is it a mitochondrial metabolic
disease and i'll be discussing
information
that shows that cancer is primarily a
mitochondrial metabolic disease
and what's shown here is a picture of a
cartoon of a cell
pointing out two of the critical
organelles the mitochondrion
and the nucleus
i will be presenting evidence that it is
the mitochondrial damage to oxidative
phosphorylation
that ultimately leads to the mutations
in the nucleus
and that the mutations in the nucleus
are
downstream epi arise as downstream
epiphenomena of the damage
to the mitochondria the organ the origin
of cellular energy
in the cell and as you can see these
little bean-shaped organelles are the
mitochondria
and the little squiggly squiggly
material inside
are cristae and they are responsible for
the generation
of energy through oxidative
phosphorylation
now we have had major scientific
theories
help explain the phenomenons of nature
over over centuries and the theory is
uh is simply an attempt to explain the
facts of nature
reality is based on the replicated facts
repeated by numbers
of scientists and laboratories whereas
the interpretation of the facts is based
on
the theory to explain this we know from
past
studies the heliocentric theory could
explain better the movements of the
celestial bodies
than could the geocentric theory the
catholic church held for centuries
along with aristotle and others that the
earth was the center of the solar system
it was the work of of copernicus and
galileo
that showed that it was in fact the sun
overturning this uh world view
on the origin of the solar system and
the universe
the germ theory could explain better the
origin of contagious diseases than could
the miasma or
bad air theory it was louis pasteur who
proposed that cancer was caused or
cancer or diseases i should say
were caused by invisible microbes
pasteur took a lot of uh of grief
and uh challenge in his in his concepts
but it was eventually
proven that he was correct the theory of
evolution the darwin wallace theory of
evolution by natural selection
could better explain the origin of
species on this planet than could the
theory of special creation
what i'll be addressing today is can the
mitochondrial metabolic theory
explain better the facts of cancer than
can the somatic mutation theory the
dominant theory
today so the current dogma about cancer
is that cancer is a genetic disease and
this paper
published by doug hanahan and robert
weinberg hallmarks of cancer the next
generation is one of the most highly
cited papers in all of the
and all of the field of biology the
take-home message of the cancer
cancer cells carry the oncogenic and
tumor suppressor mutations
that define cancer as a genetic disease
this dogmatic view of the nature of
cancer
is present in all major textbooks of
biology biochemistry
and cell biology it's also
the message that you see on the website
from the national cancer institute
cancer is a genetic disease there's no
other
there's no other discussion of
alternative views
so this this dogmatic view has
indoctrinated several generations of
physicians and scientists
into the view that cancer is caused by
somatic mutations the somatic mutation
theory is the basis for the view that
cancer is a genetic disease
mutations in genes that inhibit or
stimulate cell division contribute to
cancer
so we have mutations in tumor suppressor
genes that fail to suppress
division out of control and we have
mutations in proto-oncogenes that
stimulate
cells to divide out of control the
phenotype of cancer
is cell division out of control so this
is the definition
cell division out of control driven
by defects in suppressor genes
and in proto-oncogenes the somatic
theory argues that it is the
accumulation of random mutations that
causes the development
of a cancer cell so normal cells
suffer a series of random mutations no
one's sure how many
this this uh cartoon shows four
and the normal growth control cell
eventually enters into
a mesenchymal malignant cell
and this malignant cell will then grow
out of control and possibly spread
throughout the body
and here's a quote from dr vogelstein
one of the leading
scientists supporting the gene theory of
cancer
stating we now know precisely what
causes cancer
a sequential series of alterations in
well-known
driver genes so these driver genes
are considered the most important genes
for driving
the development of cells out of control
and the result of our work
in studying cancer as a genetic disease
is the development of personalized
therapy or we call precision medicine
and this woman is looking at a screen of
breast cancer cells
to see if they possess extra copies of a
particular gene
and this information then may play a
role in
prognosis or diagnosis or something like
this
now this would be certainly very very
important if in fact these
mutations were in fact related to the
origin of the disease
and as i will show you their downstream
epic phenomenon
and have mostly have little if any
relevance to the nature of cancer
the other problem is to get information
like this biopsy material is necessary
so tissue from patients must be taken
and examined for these genetic changes
in the very process of taking the biopsy
material
you disturb this the cancer cell micro
environment the cellular micro
environment which leads to a risk of
spreading
the cancer so you're getting information
that may be irrelevant
and putting the patient at risk by
getting this information
now let's look at evidence that
challenges the somatic mutation theory
anytime evidence comes along the
challenges a major entrenched concept
oftentimes those that work in the field
they don't want to
look at this information they don't want
to speak about it
they don't want to hear about it
basically they want to ignore it
so let's look at the evidence that
challenges the somatic mutation theory
the origin originator of the theory was
theodore bovary in 1914
he actually was the first to suggest the
possibility
that defects in a cell nucleus might be
responsible
for the origin of cancer however he was
extremely apologetic
about his conclusions and he he clearly
stated he knew nothing about cancer
never studied cancer
and that his essay was purely a
speculative discussion
yet he was made out to be the person who
originated
the theory of cancer as a genetic
disease
there's now accumulating evidence
showing that the different types of
cancers have no mutations
even deep sequencing analysis of certain
malignant cancer types
was unable to identify genes that could
be attributed to cancer
there were no mutations in some cancers
hard to explain
new information is showing that cancer
driver genes are found in normal cells
in other words normal cells in normal
tissues
express mutations in the so-called key
genes that are supposed to drive the
disease
how is it possible that normal cells
could have cancer driver disease
and not develop cancer how is it
possible
that cancer some arranging cancers have
no mutations
the somatic mutation theory has not
explained or discussed this
at all there's also carcinogens that we
know about
that do not cause mutations such as
asbestos
and some other uh carcinogens that are
not associated
with the development of cancer
also we have to consider the rarity of
cancer in our closest primate
relatives the chimpanzees and gorillas
these are cancer is extremely rare in
chimpanzees
chimpanzees are about 99
similar to us in form of protein
and and gene sequencing yet cancer is
extremely rare
indeed there has never been a documented
case
of breast cancer in a female chimpanzee
yet forty six thousand uh uh women
in this count in the united states die
from breast cancer each year how is this
possible
it's linked to diet and lifestyle issues
there is a non-mutagenic origin of
metastatic cancer
metastatic behavior not having linked to
any mutagenic origin
there are off-target effects of these
so-called cancer precision drugs
that are made to precisely target
specific genes that are involved
yet the off-target effects are quite
debilitating
and life-threatening this should not
happen if these drugs are precise
finally the nuclear transfer
mitochondrial transfer
experiments provide the strongest
evidence to argue against the origin of
cancer
as a genetic disease and what i have
done
is published this paper cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease
in the journal frontiers in cell and
developmental biology
and i encourage everyone to read this
paper very carefully
because it presents large amounts of
data that specifically argue against the
gene theory of cancer
and in support of the mitochondrial
metabolic
origin of the disease and this slide
this cartoon simply summarizes the vast
numbers of experiments
that were presented in the paper so
what we have here are normal cells and
these normal cells contain
a normal integrated nuclear genome and
they also have
normal mitochondria in the cytoplasm so
that they can
regulate their physiology quite quite
normally both energetically
and genetically and they beget normal
cells
now the red cells are tumor cells and
tumor cells beget other tumor cells
tumor cells have many gene mutations in
the nucleus
but they also have defects in the
cytoplasm
in the mitochondria lacking cristae or
having other abnormalities
now is it the mutations in the nucleus
that causes cancer
or is it the defects in the mitochondria
of the cytoplasm
that causes the cancer these experiments
were addressed quite clearly
by nuclear and mitochondrial transfer
experiments
so the nucleus of the tumor cell is then
placed in the cytoplasm of a normal cell
and what was found is that you got that
there were normal cells produced
sometimes normal tissues
and sometimes a mouse or a frog cloned
from the nucleus of a tumor cell
but these organisms showed no cancer on
the other hand
the nucleus of the normal cell was
placed in the cytoplasm of the tumor
cell
and rather than forming tumor cells or
rather than forming normal cells
they continued to produce either dead
cells or tumor cells
these results are the exact opposite of
the results predicted by the somatic
mutation theory of cancer which should
have said
that the origin resides in the nucleus
these should have formed tumors
and these should have not formed tumors
also when normal mitochondria are
transplanted
to cancer cells you get no tumors you
can suppress
the the the the development of the tumor
these fine is viewed together provide
the strongest evidence to date
that cancer cannot be a disease of
somatic mutations in the nucleus
this information together with the
previous information that i just
presented
provides overwhelming evidence that the
disease cannot be a genetic disease
so if somatic mutations are not the
origin of cancer how do we get cancer
this was described originally by the
work of otto vorberg
back in the in the 1920s 30s and 40s
cancers arise from the damage to
cellular respiration
energy through fermentation gradually
compensates
for insufficient respiration and cancer
cells continue to ferment lactic acid in
the presence of oxygen and this is
referred to as the warburg effect
cells should not continue to produce
fermentation when oxygen is present
they should shift back to oxidative
phosphorylation
the new the new findings that myself and
dr shinopoulos
from semmelweis university in budapest
we found and we found the missing link
in warburg central theory
and that is cancer cells can also
ferment succinic acid derived from
glutamine glutamine derives succinic
acid
and we call this the q effect to make it
diff to distinguish it from the warburg
effect
q is the single letter for glutamine
it's the missing link that warburg did
not know about
but can now explain the majority of
observations
in cancer so enhanced fermentation is
the signature metabolic malady
of all or most cancer cells so
if each cancer cell has a different
genetic signature in other words all the
cells in the tumor have different
genetic mutations
but all the cells in the tumor have one
common phenotype
that is they ferment then it makes sense
to target the common phenotype
than to chase after the genes which are
different in every single cancer cell
so what we have defined in our in our
this is the
the krebs cycle the tca cycle or the
citric acid cycle
and we all memorize or we have to know
about this it's in
the matrix of the mitochondria and
we now know that this step that preserve
in normal cells produces very little atp
in the cancer cell produces large
amounts of atp
through a process of mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorylation
this is a substrate level
phosphorylation step and now we have
defined this
as the origin of most of the energy in
the cancer cell
and this shows mitochondrial substrate
level phosphorylation
the missing link in the metabolic theory
and we just recently published this
paper in asn neuro
and it's in the glutaminolysis pathway
so glutamine to glutamate to
alpha-ketoglutarate to succinyl coa
to succinate so this enzymatic is a
substrate-level phosphorylation in the
mitochondria and it generates
a large amount of atp so the atp then is
coming from a different site
in the mitochondria than it in the
cancer mitochondria than it does
in the normal mitochondria
and this is a an example of what these
mitochondria look like
in cancer cells and this is a
glioblastoma very aggressive brain
cancer
but here's the normal mitochondria and
these stripes
are the cristae and they contain the
proteins
lipids and and enzymes that allow
cells to generate energy through
oxidative phosphorylation
so the cancer mitochondria in this
glioblastoma
has cristolysis the chris they are
missing and in biology we have a major
tenant um that structure
determines function and if the structure
of the organelle
is abnormal the function of the of the
organelle
will be abnormal if the parts of the
organelle responsible for oxidative
phosphorylation are missing
the organelle will be unable to generate
energy through oxidative phosphorylation
this is direct evidence indicating that
the structure of the organelle
is abnormal in this tumor cell
and these kinds of tumors glioblastoma
but we also see the same phenomenon
in the in the mitochondria of all kinds
of cancers
here's breast cancer and colorectal
cancer and here you can see the tumor
cells with
vacuoles and disorganized cristae
compared to normal
and here you can see in the colorectal
mitochondria that have no cristae
structure determines function we have
found
these mitochondrial abnormalities in all
types of major cancers bladder cancer
lung cancer
colon cancer breast cancers brain
cancers
all the major types of cancers have have
we have seen the same structural
abnormalities others on mic on
ultrastructure analysis
now the results of this will alter the
the energy metabolism in cells
so if we look at energy metabolism in
normal cells
we see that the bulk of energy comes
from
oxidative phosphorylation with the waste
products of co2 and water
so glucose is metabolized in the
glycolytic pathway to pyruvate pyruvate
enters the mitochondria
and the krebs cycle is fully oxidized
and generates this energy
through the process of oxidative
phosphorylation very little energy is
coming out of the cytoplasm
in glycolysis or out of the krebs cycle
that i showed you before
in normal cells these are called
substrate-level phosphorylations
they can work in the presence or absence
of of oxygen
you have to realize that energy is the
key
necessity for life without energy
nothing can grow
so it's very important to know where the
energy comes from
now this is the cancer cell energy is
coming from
totally different places the majority of
energy so we get
cancer cell gets very little energy from
oxidative phosphorylation because the
cristae and the mitochondria are
abnormal as i've just shown you
but this cell still remains alive
because it generates energy
in the cytoplasm with lactic acid as a
waste product which is the warburg
effect
or succinic acid as a waste product
coming from the krebs cycle
so the krebs cycle and glycolysis
generate the majority of energy through
substrate level phosphorylation and
non-oxidative process
where much less energy now comes from a
from uh
oxidative phosphorylation so this is the
key shift
the cancer cell is generating energy
through different processes
so the question now how how does this
relate to dysregulated cell growth how
does this
disturbed energy metabolism link to the
hallmarks of the disease
and this is what we've been able to show
we've been able to reconfigure
the landscape of understanding cancer by
placing
the focus on the origin for this
organelle the mitochondria
so we know and this was the
concept of the oncogenic paradox that
plagued
and puzzled the field even to this day
you'll read
and see many examples where people
simply don't understand
how all the provocative agents that have
been linked to the origin of cancer
could cause the disease through a common
pathophysiology mechanism carcinogens
cause cancer we know that
that's why they're called carcinogens
they cause cancer carcinogens damage
enter the mitochondria and damages
oxfoss radiation
can damage oxidative phosphorylation
leading to the origin of cancer
intermittent hypoxia damages
mitochondria leading to the origin of
cancer
inflammation can damage mitochondrial
function chronic
inflammation is a known risk factor for
the development of cancer
rare inherited mutations like the
brachial one and the leaf rule many
mutations
that people recognize they operate by
damaging
mitochondria the ras oncogene
is known to be a facilitator of cancer
it damages mitochondria
viruses we know of many different kinds
of viruses the papilloma virus
hepatitis c virus viruses can cause
cancer because they
either the virus themselves or the
products of the virus
damage the mitochondria and of course
aging
a cancer is higher in older people than
younger people
age damages by just living on the planet
age will damage
mitochondria now all of this
mitochondrial damage
leads to the reactive generation of
ros which are reactive
oxygen species the reaction oxygen
species
damage the nuclear genome lipids and
proteins in the cell
so the mutations that we see in cancer
come
as the result of damage from reactive
oxygen species
the mutations are an effect they are not
the cause of cancer
so the majority of of studies on cancer
have really been focusing on downstream
epi phenomena
where the real origin of the disease is
related to the
the function of the mitochondria now
interestingly enough the rice dama
the ross also damage oxidative
phosphorylation
oxfords the mitochondria rec
cell send a signal to the nucleus that
that the organelle is incapable
of providing enough energy to maintain
the life of the cell
this signaling system then turns on
genes in the nucleus
that upregulate substrate level
phosphorylation
like hif1 alpha and mick so in order to
run substrate level phosphorylation
you need fermentable fuels and the
fermentable fuels are glucose
and glutamine so the mitochondria
signals
the nucleus the nucleus begins to
upregulate
pathways transporters to bring in
glucose and glutamine through and
generating energy through substrate
level
phosphorylation while the mitochondria
continue to suffer
damage and gradually lose their ability
to produce
energy through oxfos it is this
transition
from oxidative phosphorylation to
substrate-level phosphorylation
that ultimately leads to the development
of dysregulated
cell growth so we can then link the
hallmarks of cancer as defined by
hanahan and weinberg directly back to
damage to the respiration
and energy transition in the cell so the
first three hallmarks self-sufficiency
insensitivity to anti-growth
and limitless replicative potential is
the result
of the cell falling back on its default
state
and the default state of mammalian cells
is proliferation
and proliferation was the phenotype of
all cells and organisms on the planet
before oxygen came into the atmosphere
some 2.5 billion years ago so the cancer
cell is falling back on
ancient pathways that lead to unbridled
proliferation
as all cells did before oxygen came into
the
into the atmosphere this also leads to
blood vessel development in the cancer
cells which is
angiogenesis in the in the micro
environment of the cancer cell i should
say
also leads to evasion of apoptosis
or programmed cell death why is this
cancer cell
bypassing the natural ability to die
when energy metabolism is so shifted
because the mitochondria control
apoptosis the mitochondria act as the
kill switch
if the kill switch is broken the cell
will bypass
its its programmed cell death uh
mechanism
and therefore go on to to um to
proliferate now the key question is
metastasis
which is ultimately responsible for the
death of 90 percent
of cancer patients how do you link
metastasis
to disturbed energy metabolism first we
need to look at the
metastatic cascade so the metacast
metastatic cascade is a
stereotypical typical series of events
that underlie uh the origin from any
tissue
breast cancer colon cancer you know
bladder cancer
all these different cancers to spread
around the body go through the same
cascade
first there's a local invasion so here
are the green cells represented as the
cancer cells
they become metabolically destabilized
enter their default state of
proliferation and eventually break
through the basement membrane and enter
into the local tissue
in travisation now some of these cells
have the ability to enter into the blood
vessels and then
avoid the immune system and actually
suppress the immune system so
survival and immunosuppressive effects
they also move through the bloodstream
and extravazate leave the bloodstream
and form tumors in different distant
organs
and that's ultimately what we call
cancer spreader metastasis
so a question is how can the
accumulation of random somatic mutations
cause a non-random metastatic cascade
based on the epithelial mesenchymal
transition which i haven't talked about
but this is the basis for cancer
metastasis based on the somatic mutation
theory
it makes no sense so the question is how
how how do we explain all of this based
on the mitochondrial
metabolic theory of cancer so
it is linked to the macrophage fusion
hypothesis
macrophages these red cells are actually
uh
guardians of our body their wound
healing cells
they patrol our entire entire body they
enter and exit bloodstream they
they work with the immune system they
are part of the immune system
so when we have an incipient here's
normal epithelial cells many cancers
arise from epithelial cells
so they become destabilized by any one
of the provocative agents they have
destabilized energy metabolism
they're entering their default state but
they are not capable
of spreading around the body our immune
cells come into this
micro environment recognizing cancer as
an unhealed wound
and they begin to throw out growth
factors in cytokines which is like
putting gasoline
on the fire it stimulates these
incipient cancer cells to grow even more
even more disorganized and dysregulated
the immune cells
will fuse to put out the heal the wound
they'll either fuse together or
fuse with the cancer these incipient
cancer cells
thereby diluting the cytoplasm with
abnormal mitochondria
now what you have is these rogue
macrophages former immune cells
they are already genetically programmed
to spread throughout the body because
this is what they do in their normal
function
but now they are metabolically
destabilized with a genetic
architecture to spread around the body
and that's what they do they intravisit
and they suppress the immune system and
they are the tumor cells that
will be the most deadly and they are
heavily dependent
on glutamine and glucose for their
survival
so recognizing that all cancer cells
require glutamine and glucose especially
the metastatic cells
so if most cancer cells obtain energy
through fermentation then what therapies
might we
be effective in managing and preventing
the tumors well one strategy
is to reduce levels of fermentable fuels
while elevating levels of
non-fermentable fuels
and this is a simple diagram
illustrating how we begin to shift
levels of the fermentable fuel glucose
and replacing glucose with the
non-fermentable fuel
ketone bodies which are derived from the
mobilization of fats in the liver
so the liver makes ketone bodies out of
mobilized fats
so blood sugar must be lowered because
the cancer cells
thrive on fermentable glucose so glucose
is fermented to lactic acid so in order
to stop that process
it is important to lower blood sugar
levels but
but we're taking away a fuel right so
you have to replace one fuel with
another fuel
so we increase ketone bodies ketone
bodies
have to be respired in normal
mitochondria if the mitochondria are
defective they can't use ketone bodies
for energy
only normal cells with normal
mitochondria can use the ketone bodies
for energy
so when people say cancer cells can burn
ketone bodies no they can't
then they would have to argue against
all of the structural defects that i
just showed you
on the structure function in the
mitochondria mitochondria
of cancer cells cannot burn ketones as a
matter of fact ketones are
absolutely toxic to many cancer cells
so we developed the glucose ketone index
calculator which is a simple tool to
monitor therapeutic efficacy
and the metabolic management not only a
brain cancer because we now know that
all cancers suffer a similar
similar problem so this tool can be used
to
to help monitor therapies for all types
of types of cancer
and basically it's the ratio of glucose
and millimolars to ketone bodies in
millimolar
and you get this gki glucose ketone
index
and we showed with others that
therapeutic efficacy
is considered best with index ratios
approaching 1.0 or below
and i'll discuss it can be challenging
to get to these ratios
but it's these ratios that will be
effective
uh in managing all types of cancer
now we adopted this glucose ketone index
into a more global
approach to cancer management called the
press pulse
therapy using two different strategies a
chronic press
that puts stress on on the cancer cell
metabolism
and then acute pulses specific
specifically drugs and procedures
that will interact synergistically will
work synergistically with press
therapies
so essentially with the goal is to
uh gradually move the patient
from a state of disease to a state of
health
by strategically targeting tumor cells
while enhancing the health and vitality
of normal cells
a very different strategy than is what
is currently done
so certain press therapies include
ketogenic metabolic therapy using
restricted ketogenic diets and ketone
supplements
stress management emotional stress
contributes
anxiety contributes to elevated blood
sugar
so we do we do stress management
therapies to lower
anxiety and blood sugar through
corticosteroid elevation we reduce
corticosteroid elevation
and then we use certain drugs and
procedures that work to target
availability of glucose and glutamine
working together with the press therapy
and gradually the cancer is degraded
slowly and
the patient will emerge from the
treatment healthier than when they
started
the key goal here is to is to degrade
and kill tumor cells
without harming the body and even
enhancing the health and vitality
of the of the of the overall body
now this is a paper that we recently
published in a preclinical system for
glioblastoma
outlining how press pulse works to
manage aggressive
uh brain cancer malignant brain cancer
and we combined a calorie-restricted
ketogenic diet that is
ketogenic metabolic um therapy
together with a glucose targeting drug
called don
uh 6-dioxynor glucene this is a drug
that looks like glutamine but cannot be
metabolized
and this strategic synergistic
interaction
was able to significantly kill and wipe
out these brain cancer cells
while improving overall survival and
quality of life
now this is great this the the concepts
are built on the pre-clinical system
and we also then use this to treat a
patient this
same concept uh press pulse metabolic
strategy
to treat a young man with glioblastoma
from egypt the patient was doing
remarkably well
unfortunately we had to use standard of
care which involved radiation and
chemotherapy
uh but he survived most of that quite
well using the press pulse metabolic
therapy
uh we published this paper after two
years the patient was doing very very
well
but unfortunately the patient expired at
30 months of age
um dying relatively quickly
at 30 months and an autopsy biopsy
material was taken
and it turned out that the patient had
died not from the tumor
but from the damaged radiation necrosis
the
the radiation that was used as part of
the standard of care
was was described as being responsible
for the demise of this patient now based
on this
and much many other uh much other
information we published this paper a
provocative question
should ketogenic metabolic therapy
become the standard of care for
glioblastoma
and what we did here is we outlined in
no uncertain terms
how the current use of radiation and
chemo
is largely responsible for facilitating
the recurrence and growth and demise of
the majority of brain cancer patients
so it's the therapy itself that's
putting these poor patients
at risk for early and rapid death so it
is
my opinion that replacement of standard
of care
with ketogenic metabolic therapy will
not only improve progression freezer and
overall survival
but but also help these patients to
uh overcome their disease in in in in a
less far less
toxic way and we think this will be the
future this has to be the future because
the current
system is not working now this is a
paper that recently came out
showing how press pulse metabolic
therapy could could
uh manage a highly metastatic thioma in
a woman
no radiation no chemo uh no standard of
care but only metabolic therapy
these these papers uh present
the rationale for why the approach to
metabolic therapy
should be considered for the management
of cancer and this is another paper that
we recently published
using ketogenic metabolic therapy how
that would work
as a complementary or alternative
approach to managing breast cancer
and we think the majority of breast
cancer patients
whether triple negative or what what
class they have because all cancers
suffer the same metabolic malady
that they would respond remarkably well
to ketogenic metabolic therapy as an
alternative
or even complementary approach to
standards of care
so and this is the paper where we also
showed
outlined how biopsy taking biopsy tissue
from the breast can put the patient at
risk for spreading the cancer in other
words making it
much worse so why are we taking the
biopsy material
to do gene profiles to see what kind of
when the genes are are
largely irrelevant to the disease so we
we've outlined that ketogenic metabolic
therapy could be
the best approach for managing not only
breast cancer
but by all cancers because of the
underlying
uh origin of the disease so in
conclusion
most if not all cancers are a type of
mitochondrial metabolic disease
cancer is not a genetic disease has been
widely considered
and it is my view that this
misunderstanding of cancer as a genetic
disease
is largely responsible
for the failure to reduce death rates
from cancer
so until this changes i don't see much
progress happening
a reliance on substrate-level
phosphorylation for energy is the
metabolic hallmark
of most if not all cancers therefore
based on that knowledge the simultaneous
restriction
of glucose and glutamine can help manage
most cancers
the press pulse metabolic therapy is a
non-toxic
cost-effective strategy for the possible
management
of most cancers and eventually this
press pulse therapy
will replace these toxic and ineffective
standards of care i'd like to thank
recognize the various the large numbers
of people that have worked
with us over the years to develop the
concepts that i've presented
and moving forward we hope to develop a
global
society for metabolic therapy where we
can we can
replace current toxic standards of care
with um more rational more under
more less cost effective and less toxic
strategies
to improve overall survival and
progression-free survival
and finally i'd like to thank those who
support our research especially
the foundation for metabolic cancer
therapy set up by travis christopherson
and if those would you know we we we
need support for our research and
and the this these foundations and
groups have been very helpful
in keeping our research program going so
that we can develop the concepts further
uh that i've mentioned in this talk the
george you foundation
dr joseph maroon uh mr edward miller the
kenneth rainen foundation the crossfit
organization
boston college research fund children
with cancer united kingdom
and the nih and thank you for your
attention
thomas seafred as always uh fascinating
pretty heavy going at times but uh
really interesting stuff in it and as he
says it's all about the uh
it's not the nucleus it's the cytoplasm
it's a mitochondria
yeah i mean look i have to say i'm
was absolutely amazed the first time i
saw thomas present
um it's absolutely brilliant stuff and
anybody who hasn't seen him
i always encourage them to have a look
at what he's saying and
i think he really has a revelation for
both you and i
when we're in medical school we've been
taught that cancer
is a genetic disease and he presents
so lucidly all that the science that
disproves this
and i mean so just quite simply inside
our
inside our cells we carry our genetic
material in something called the nucleus
that's where our dna is
and outside the nucleus we have the this
cytoplasm or the fluid of the cell and
that's where we have
these little things called mitochondria
which are commonly known as the
powerhouses of cell and mitochondria
are basically where energy is produced
if we're looking at a metabolic disease
almost certainly it's going to be
involving the mitochondria
and i was just fascinated at the
experiments he described
where they had cancerous cells and they
were able to transfer the nucleus
which contains all the genetic
information
into another cell and they found that
those
cells that received this damage dna
did not develop cancer and yet
when they did the same thing when they
took the fluid
containing the mitochondria from cancer
affected cells
and they transferred that to other cells
they did
transfer the cancer i mean i just think
this is an incredibly
powerful piece of evidence that
perhaps we've got it totally wrong
that it's not a genetic disease that we
do have genetic mutations but
as thomas says they're downstream
effects
from the from the metabolic dysfunction
so metabolic dysfunction in and of
itself can lead to an increase in
oxidative stress reactive oxygen species
so on and so forth
and they are what can cause this random
genetic damage that we often see
and i say often but not always see in
cancer cells i mean
this i don't know if i'm being over the
top it's worthy of a nobel prize
i had the same thought and why isn't
that experiment universally uh
praised and universally recognized well
it's not even just one experiment it's a
whole series of experiments
that he's put together so elegantly that
all show the same thing
so the question is as thomas raised
i mean how can we change people's minds
people have
you know everything you taught in
medical school you still believe and
people are so reluctant to
uh to open their their ears and eyes to
new ideas so the challenge is is
something that seems very obvious
there's good scientific
evidence and yet there's a reluctance
from the medical profession to change
their entrenched ideas which is uh
quite a real sort of criticism i think
of our profession
uh absolutely i've actually spoken to
people who work in oncology
about this and there there are some
uh some allowances that diet perhaps can
be involved in metabolism might be
involved but not
not enough to actually change the the
central paradigm of treatment
we know you know we're both sports and
exercise medicine physicians we know
that
people who exercise can have something
along
the size of a 30 reduction in all-cause
mortality if they have cancer
we know that obesity metabolic ill
health is
independently associated with at least
13 different types of cancers we know
there's a metabolic element and yet we
just seem to be ignoring
what's staring us in our face
and we just need more people like tom to
spread the word
i i can't wait for the day when
this hopefully becomes the accepted
theory of cancer
[Music]
you